

###UMKC Entrepreneurial Legal Services Clinic
###UMKC School of Law
###4747 Troost, Ste. 213
###Kansas City, Missouri 64110-2499
###[phoneNumber]
###Fax [faxNumber]

CONFIDENTIAL MEMORANDUM

		[date]

TO:	     [clientName]
FROM:     [attorneyName], UMKC Entrepreneurial Legal Services Clinic
RE:	     Choice of Entity for Business Venture
	
	We understand from our discussions with you to date that you wish to establish [typeOfEntity]. You are seeking assistance in selecting the proper businoess entity and assistance in forming such entity.  We understand that you will be the [numOwners] owner of the business, at least at the outset.  We have agreed to assist you with such entity choice and formation matters.  

The purpose of this correspondence is to provide you with an overview of some of the principal issues typically involved in a “choice of entity” analysis. As reflected in the discussion below, the decisions you will have to make in this area include determinations both as to the type of entity to form under state laws and the desired classification of the entity for income tax purposes.

THRESHOLD QUESTION: WHY FORM AN ENTITY?

	Generally speaking, an individual is not required to form any sort of business entity when starting a business in which he or she will be the sole owner (although there may be other requirements such as occupational licenses or other industry-specific regulations).  An individual who is the sole owner of a business who does not form any entity is known as a “sole proprietor.” For federal income tax purposes, a sole proprietor reports his or her business income and expenses on a schedule “C” attached to a form 1040. Being a sole proprietor means he or she is personally liable for obligations and liabilities incurred in the business.  “Personal liability” means the individual could be sued on the business debts, or by a person injured by the conduct of the business, and his or her personal assets, such as his or her individual bank account and his or her home might be attached for payment of a judgment.   

 Most business owners want to lessen the risk of losing personal assets to pay claims against the business by placing the business in an entity that might provide a shield against such personal liability, at least to some extent.   Although there can be other reasons for an owner to form an “entity” to operate the business and own the business assets, such as having a clearly separable vehicle for maintaining books and records, the first “choice of entity” consideration we will discuss below is the concept of “limited liability.”  
	
LIMITED LIABILITY  

Generally 

Originally, many business owners used “corporations” to shield them from personal liability. For instance, if you became a shareholder in a publicly traded corporation listed on the New York Stock Exchange, you would presumably anticipate the risk that the amount you invested in the purchase of your stock in that company might be lost, but you would not expect to be personally liable to pay for the corporation’s unpaid phone bills or other debts.  This same “limited liability” concept can apply to a corporation that has only one shareholder, or a small number of shareholders. In addition to corporations, other modern types of business entities also now offer limited liability.

Business Entities Offering Limited Liability

	For a business with one owner, the most popular business entities offering limited liability are the “corporation” and the “limited liability company” (“LLC”).  Under Missouri law, for example, a “shareholder” of a corporation or a “member” who owns an LLC will generally not be held liable for the company debts.  For businesses with two or more owners, limited liability can be obtained for the owners in a corporation or an LLC, and for some or all of the owners in the following types of partnerships:  a limited partnership, limited liability partnership (“LLP”) or limited liability limited partnership (“LLLP”).  

As you have told us that you intend to be the sole owner of your business, our discussion below will focus on a comparison of just the “corporation” and “LLC” alternatives.  In both cases, those types of business entities can be formed in a way that would allow you to bring additional owners into such corporation or LLC if that becomes desirable in the future.  We also discuss below the possibility of converting the first entity you form to one of the other types of business entities if and when you decide to bring in additional owners.  In any event, you will want to periodically reconsider the form of your business entity and its taxation as your business grows and evolves. 

	Exceptions to Limited Liability

If you form a corporation or LLC, while you are generally not personally liable for that entity’s debts and obligations (beyond the assets you agreed to contribute to the   entity), there are various ways you could become personally liable, placing the assets you own outside the business entity at risk as well.  The following is a brief description of some of the more common ways in which such personal liability might occur:

Contractual Guarantees.  If a business needs a loan, the lender (for example, a bank) will often require a personal guarantee from the business owner as a condition to making the loan.  In such instances, the business owner is agreeing to make the loan payments if the business entity cannot or does not make them.  In a newly formed business entity short on capital and without a credit history, other parties (landlords or suppliers) may also request an owner’s personal guarantee.   Please remember that giving your personal guarantee on any business debt will have the legal effect of making you personally liable for the debt regardless of any general rule of limited liability, so should be done only if you have consciously decided the personal guarantee is necessary and you have taken steps to limit its scope and amount as much as possible.

Payroll Taxes and Other Special Statutes.  Another important exception is in the area of payroll and other taxes.  Depending upon the facts (i.e., who was the person responsible for paying taxes?), the federal or state governments can impose fines and collect directly from the shareholder or LLC member, as the case may be.  Similarly, special statutes in other areas (such as liability for “operators” under the federal environmental statutes known as “CERCLA”) can result in personal liability in situations in which a business owner might otherwise have limited liability.

	Personal Negligence/Wrongdoing. A properly formed corporation or LLC for your business venture is designed to limit your liability as the owner not only for business debts but also for claims such as negligence that are the result of an employee’s acts.  For instance, suppose a child is hurt at the entity’s business establishment and an employee of the corporation or LLC was at fault for the injury; the employee and your company could be held liable, but your personal loss due to liability should generally be limited to your investment/interest in the company.  However, if you yourself were at fault (by your own action/omission or by negligent supervision of an employee, for example), you may be held directly and personally liable (i.e, your own obligation for wrongdoing).  

	You can mitigate some of these exposures with general business liability or other types of insurance coverage (product liability or malpractice insurance that covers you, your company, and/or your employees for these types of claims).  Such coverage generally covers your personal acts as well as those of your employees, though there can be significant limits and exceptions to coverage.  We recommend you investigate insurance not only because it can give you good coverage for potential claims, but also because it often will pay for the attorney defending claims, even when the claim is questionable.  This cost-of-defense element can be a very important value of having insurance and you should carefully consider policies that include such coverage, taking into account and comparing the offered coverage and premium costs.

	Piercing the Entity “Veil”.	Apart from the types of personal liability instances described above, Kansas and Missouri courts have traditionally been somewhat reluctant to disregard properly organized corporate entities and find the business owner personally liable for other corporate debts.  However, in some situations when justice requires, courts can “pierce the corporate veil” (that is, find one or more of the owners personally liable for corporate debts).  This may happen where owners dominate the corporation in a manner that blurs personal and company actions; mix personal and company assets; fail to respect “corporate formalities” (discussed further below); have too little capital in the company; or commit fraud or misrepresentation (such as wrongfully leading third parties to believe the company can cover obligations to them when in fact it has insufficient financial ability to do so).  As the law has evolved, you should assume that the courts would apply to LLCs “veil piercing” analyses similar to that applied to corporations.  Thus, whether you form a corporation or LLC we will outline the steps you should take to minimize the risk of losing limited liability due to veil-piercing (such as, for example, maintaining the business and your personal accounts separately; adequate capitalization and insurance; taking actions in the company’s name including signing documents properly; and properly maintaining company books and records). 

	Failure to File Annual Renewals.  In Missouri, there are annual registration/renewal filings required for corporations, LLPs and LLLPs, but not LLCs.  In Kansas, there are annual registration/renewal filings required for corporations, LLPs, LLLPs and LLCs.  Failure to file the annual renewal for an LLP or LLLP leads directly to personal liability exposure for the partners in an LLP and the “general partners” in an LLLP.  Failure to file the annual registration for a Missouri or Kansas corporation or the Kansas LLC can lead to “administrative dissolution” of the corporation or LLC, and, if an individual purports to act on behalf of the corporation or LLC in carrying on business after such dissolution, may expose such individual to personal liability.  Thus, when considering choice of entity, one must explore the state filings required to keep the opportunity for limited liability in place.


TAX CONSIDERATIONS

	In addition to limited liability planning, a variety of tax considerations can be significant in choice of entity determinations.  Set forth below is some basic information about some of the key tax factors of potential relevance in your situation.

	Choice of State Formation

	There is flexibility in choosing the state in which to form your business entity.  While Missouri would seem a logical choice in your current circumstances, it is possible to choose to form your entity under the laws of Kansas, Delaware or another state.  Moreover, if you are to conduct business in any state(s) other than the state of formation you will generally need to register to do business in such other state(s).  When we next meet we can discuss reasons why the founders of a business might consider the laws of a state other than Missouri for the initial formation of their business entity.  It would seem from our discussions with you to date, however, that forming a Missouri business entity will likely make the most sense for you at this point.

Income Tax Status: Double Taxation Versus “Pass-Through” Treatment

	In planning the formation of a business venture that will have just one owner, a matter of particular significance is determining the classification of the arrangement for federal income tax purposes.  As noted above, a sole proprietor operating a business without a business “entity” typically reports the income and expense from the business directly on his or her individual tax return (on Schedule C of his or her Form 1040).  

If, instead of a sole proprietorship, the owner forms a corporation or LLC, the issue of tax classification is a little more complicated. If, as a matter of state business organizations law, the entity is formed as a corporation, then it is possible that it could be (what the Internal Revenue Code calls) a “C” corporation or an “S” corporation for tax purposes.  If it is formed as an LLC under state law, then (subject to certain exceptions that should not apply in your situation) the entity could be a “C” corporation, “S” corporation or a “disregarded entity” for federal income tax purposes.   Most states (including Missouri and Kansas) follow the federal income tax classification of a business entity for state income tax purposes as well.  The following is a brief overview of some key aspects of “C” corporation, “S” corporation and disregarded entity tax status.
 
	“C” Corporation.  “C” corporations must file their own corporate tax returns and pay income tax on their income, after the deduction of allowable expenses, thus paying an income tax at the “entity level”.  If money from a “C” corporation is then distributed to the owners as dividends out of the company’s earnings and profits, it is then taxed to the owner of such company.  Many consider this as “double taxation” of the same income.  This so-called “double taxation” can often be quite burdensome for small business, unless the “C” corporation can reasonably pay out most of its earnings to its owner-employees as salary (thereby creating a deduction that lowers its entity-level taxable income).  Moreover, if the corporation accumulates earnings instead of paying out dividends, it may be subject to penalty taxes under the Accumulated Earnings Tax and Personal Holding Company Tax provisions of the Internal Revenue Code.

“S” Corporation.  An “S” corporation has what is called “pass-through” tax treatment, generally allowing qualifying small businesses to avoid the entity-level tax. The “S” corporation still has to file corporate tax returns, but without paying any tax; the tax on the net taxable income of the “S” Corporation is instead owed and paid by its owner-shareholders, thus producing a single level of tax. In your situation, it should be easy to establish eligibility to elect “S” Corporation status for tax purposes if you were to decide that tax status is desirable.

	“Disregarded Entity”.  As indicated above, an unincorporated entity (such as an LLC) with just one owner can elect to be a “C” corporation, an “S” corporation or a “disregarded entity” for income tax purposes.  A “disregarded entity” means, in this context, that the entity will be ignored for tax purposes, and its income and expenses will be reported on the owner’s individual tax return as a sole proprietorship (with Schedule C attached to the owner’s form 1040). 

Self Employment and Social Security Taxes
	
As a sole proprietor or sole owner of an LLC treated as a “disregarded entity” for federal tax purposes, you would be responsible for self-employment taxes on the business earnings.  As you know from your former employment experience, a worker pays 7.65% of his or her income for Social Security and Medicare, and his or her employer pays an equal amount.  Self-employed people must pay a total of 15.3% (since they are both employer and employee) on such income, subject to a current maximum amount of $117,000 for 2014 in earnings from self-employment.  After the $117,000 level is reached, the self-employment tax is reduced to 2.9% on further earnings.  
	
	If you form an entity that is a “C” or “S” corporation for federal tax purposes you may be able to reduce employment taxes by balancing payments to yourself between a reasonable salary and dividends (rather than paying self-employment tax on all the income of the company).  Factors involved in determining the reasonableness of a salary in this context may include, among other things, the number and responsibilities of other company employees; the extent to which capital rather than services accounts for company earnings; and salaries paid to other individuals in comparable businesses. Utilizing an “S” corporation to reduce the self-employment tax through paying the owner-employee a salary less than the current maximum, however, may adversely impact the amount of Social Security benefits that the owner-employee receives when he or she retires.
 
Tax Treatment of Employee Benefits

When your business income builds, you may want to consider providing yourself or employees with employee benefits.  Any company may deduct the cost of providing the following benefits to its employees who generally are not taxable on the benefit provided:  group-term life insurance (up to a maximum death benefit of $50,000), disability insurance, medical insurance, and cafeteria plans.  To some extent a “C” corporation may deduct the cost of such benefits provided to owner-employees without the benefits being taxable to the owner-employee.  But for fringe benefits, the tax law treats a shareholder who owns more than 2% of the total number of shares of an “S” corporation the same as any other self-employed individual, such as sole proprietors (including owners of disregarded LLC’s). The receipt of such fringe benefits by the owner-employee of an “S” corporation, then, will be taxable to the owner-employee unless he or she owns 2% or less than the outstanding stock of the corporation, which obviously would not apply in your situation.  However, sole proprietors, owners of disregarded entities and, in general, the owner-shareholders with more than 2% of all “S” corporation shares may now deduct 100% of the cost paid for the owner’s health insurance.  

POSSIBILITY OF BRINGING IN ADDITIONAL OWNERS
  
In the future, you may decide to admit new owners to your business. As a general proposition, a corporation, LLC, general or limited partnership, LLP or LLLP can accommodate shared ownership.  Before admitting additional owners to any of these types or organizations, you should consider a variety of business issues, such as: 
•	who will be obligated to contribute capital or guarantee loans to, or other obligations of the business, and in what ratio?
•	what management decisions will require various levels of approval? 
•	who will receive what levels of compensation and shares of profits?
•	will owners be allowed to transfer their interests to family members or to outsiders?
•	and under what circumstances might the entity or other owners be obligated (or have an option) to buy out the ownership interest of an owner?
Answering such questions can involve significant tax issues that may affect different owners differently, and affect your decision about what would be the best tax classification for a multi-owner business entity.  From a flexibility standpoint, and particularly taking into account tax aspects, it is often easier to “convert” an entity that is not currently taxed as a “corporation” into one that is taxed as a corporation than it is to do the opposite.  Thus, in terms of the possibility of admitting additional owners down the road, avoiding “corporation” tax status for a business entity that currently will have only one owner is often desirable.


CONCLUSION

Based on our last meeting, and our understanding of your current situation and goals, it seems an LLC treated as a “disregarded entity” for federal income tax purposes the best choice for your wholly-owned business venture at this time, given the advantages of limited liability, the desirability of a single level of taxation on income, the relative ease of formation and entity maintenance, and flexibility in terms of the possible admission of additional owners later.  However, after you have had a chance to review the foregoing and ask us any questions you may have, we should discuss this tentative conclusion and make sure you are comfortable with the ultimate choice of entity before preparing your documents.  Please contact [attorneyName] ([phoneNumber] or [attorneyEmail]) to let her know your thoughts.  If you feel comfortable with formation of a limited liability company, we will proceed with the preparation of those documents.  If you have questions or wish to discuss your choice further, we will make an appointment for that purpose.  We look forward to hearing from you soon.


